Accountability feature (#81)
autonity/docs.autonity.org: content/docs/concepts/accountability/_index.md

- _reporting_: as the validator reporting a (suspected) rule infraction and submitting new _fault proof_ / _accusation_ on-chain
- _offending_: as the validator committing a suspected rule infraction and being requested to submit _innocence_ proofs on-chain.
- _committee member_: as a validator in the consensus committee executing Autonity's consensus protocol and for AFD handling and processing accountability events, maintaining system state for accountability events, and computing and applying slashing penalties.

Validators play the following economic roles in AFD processing:

- _offender_: loss of stake, validator reputation, staking reward revenue as the _offending_ validator of a slashed _fault_
- _beneficiary_: gain of the _offending_ validator's protocol rewards as the _reporting_ validator of a slashed _fault_.

Autonity community play the following economic role in AFD processing:

- _beneficiary_: gain of slashed stake token for community funds.

### Protocol primitives

Essential primitives of AFD are: accusation, innocence, and fault proofs; slashing and severity; jailing.

#### Accusations

> An _accusation_ is a claim that a consensus committee member has failed to participate correctly in consensus. I.e. it has failed to adhere to a rule governing validator participation in consensus and so is guilty of a rule infraction. Protocol only allows a validator to be under _accusation_ once at a time. New _accusations_ are made by submitting evidence of an accusable rule infraction on-chain as an accountability event of type `Accusation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _accusation_ is a claim that a consensus committee member has failed to participate correctly in consensus. Protocol only allows a validator to be under _accusation_ once at a time. New _accusations_ are made by submitting evidence of an accusable rule infraction on-chain as an accountability event of type `Accusation`.
```

Less is more in my opinion

Accusations do not automatically cause slashing and an _innocence proof window_ measured in blocks gives the accused _offending_ validator a window to detect an _accusation_ and prove _innocence_ by submitting an _innocence_ proof on-chain.

There are protocol constraints on when an _accusation_ can be made. A _reporting_ validator can only submit an _accusation_ _proof_ if:

- the _offending_ validator:

>   - does not already have a _fault_ in the epoch for which the _new accusation_ is being made for an offence with a higher _severity_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - has not been already punished in the epoch for which the new _accusation_ is being made for, for an offence with a higher severity.
```

This sentence was a bit hard to parse for me, not sure if my version is better though.

Author: Hmm, take out the `, for` and that's fine I think:

- has not been already punished in the epoch for which the new _accusation_ is being made for an offence with a higher severity.

  - is not currently already accused of committing a rule infraction, i.e. there is a _pending accusation_. In this case, a _new accusation_ cannot be made until expiry of the _innocence proof window_. This creates a _deadline_ measured in block height before which a new `accusation` cannot be submitted.
- it is within the _accusation window_:
  - an accusation must be made `<= 256` blocks after the detected accountability event.

> As each block is finalised, AFD will attempt to promote _accusations_ where the _innocence proof submission window_ has expired within protocol constraints to proven _faults_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As each block is finalised, AFD will attempt to promote _ expired accusations_ (where the _innocence proof submission window_ has elapsed) to proven _faults_.
```

<!--
To check if an _offending_ validator has a _pending accusation_, a _reporting_ validator calls protocol functions:

- [`canAccuse()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canaccuse): to determine if (a) an offending validator is accusable, and, (b) the _deadline_ number of blocks remaining in the _innocence proof submission window_ if there is a _pending accusation_.
- [`canSlash()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canslash): to determine if the  _offending_ validator already has a _fault_ for a rule infraction in the epoch with a _severity_ higher than the new accusable rule infraction detected.
-->

> After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of an _accusation_ on-chain a `NewAccusation` event is emitted logging the _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, _severity_ of rule infraction, and the event ID.

Reviewer: I would move this after the 2nd paragraph.

Reading it after the paragraph that explains accusation promotion gives the idea that the `NewAccusation` is issued when the accusation is promoted.

Author: Makes sense @lorenzo-dev1 - moved in commit 2f02b70a085047615a816682b56ed4fbd10cee6c.

---
title: "Accountability and fault detection"
linkTitle: "Accountability and fault detection"
weight: 6
description: >

>   Autonity's Accountability Fault Detection model, reporting, proving innocence or guilt, temporal constraints, and economics for reporting offences and penalties for Byzantine behaviour.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Autonity's Accountability Fault Detection model -- reporting mechanism, temporal constraints and economics for reporting offences and penalties for Byzantine behaviour.
```

---

## Overview

This section describes the Autonity accountability and fault detection protocol, the role of validators in submitting and verifying accountability event proofs (fault, accusation, innocence), the lifecycle for fault accountability and detection, and slashing.

> Autonity implements an _accountability and fault detection_ (AFD) protocol for detecting infractions of consensus rules by validators participating in [consensus](/glossary/#consensus) as [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) members. [Consensus](/glossary/#consensus) rules govern committee behaviour during consensus while participating in block proposal and voting as a committee member. Failure to adhere to these rules is a _rule infraction_ and AFD will detect and apply slashing penalties for proven rule infractions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Autonity implements an _accountability and fault detection_ (AFD) protocol for detecting infractions of consensus rules by validators participating in [consensus](/glossary/#consensus) as [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) members. [Consensus](/glossary/#consensus) rules govern committee behaviour while participating in block proposal and voting. Failure to adhere to these rules is a _rule infraction_.
```

The next paragraph explains how rule infractions are treated (post on-chain, slashing, ...)

> Proven rule infractions are reported as _faults_ and slashing makes faults _accountable_. Faults are _detected_ by validators and submitted on chain as accountability _events_ providing proof of behaviour. This proof is derived from consensus messaging between validators during consensus rounds and submitted on-chain to the Accountability Contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Proven rule infractions are reported as _faults_ and slashing makes faults _accountable_. Faults are _detected_ by validators and submitted on chain as accountability _events_ providing proof of misbehaviour. Proofs are derived from consensus messaging between validators during consensus rounds and submitted on-chain to the Accountability Contract.
```

It is important to note that AFD runs alongside Autonity's Tendermint proof of stake consensus implementation and is _fully automated_: accountability events are generated and processed by protocol; no manual intervention by validator operators is required. 

AFD functions by submitting, verifying, and processing accountability event proofs by epoch. Rule infractions can be:

- directly submitted as a _fault_ proof by a _reporting_ validator

> - promoted from accusations where they are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
promoted from accusations, which in turns are:
```

Personally I am not sure if these details belong to the overview. I think here we should just give an high-level description of the fact that we have misbehaviour proofs that are used for `self-incriminating` infractions, and then we have the accusation flow for `suspicious` behaviors.

Additionally, I think we should have two sections *misbheaviour lifecycle* and *accusation lifecycle* (or flow, whatever we want to call it), in which we explain in details the 2 full flows from posting on-chain to eventual slashing (with diagrams). 

Edit:
Reading more of the docs, I think that as of now the sections which more closely resemble what I have in mind are the ones under `protocol primitives`. Personally I think those paragraphs describe very well the *lifecycle* of the accusation / misbehaviour / slashing / etc. etc.

Maybe the easy change would be to rename `protocol primitives` --> `protocol lifecycles` and rename `Accountability event lifecycle` to something else (or completely remove it, move it to another page. I am still thinking whether it makes sense to have it here or not).

What do you think?

  - reported as an _accusation_, submitted by a _reporting_ validator against an _offending_ validator

>   - defended by an _innocence_ proof, submitted by the _offending_ validator within a proof submission window measured in blocks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - eventually defended by an _innocence_ proof, submitted by the _offending_ validator within a proof submission window measured in blocks
```

>   - promoted to _fault_ by protocol on individual block finalisation if not refuted by an _innocence_ proof and the _offending_ validator does not already have a _fault_ with a higher or equivalent severity for the same epoch. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - if not defended, promoted to _fault_ by the protocol once the innocence window has expired.
```

imho no need for these details in the overview

> Slashing penalties are computed by protocol and  applied for proven faults at epoch end. The penalty amount is computed based on a base slashing rate and slashing factors including the total number of slashable offences committed in the epoch and the individual _offending_ validator's own slashing history.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slashing penalties are computed by protocol and  applied for proven faults at epoch end. The penalty amount is computed based on a base slashing rate and slashing factors including the total number of slashable offences committed in the epoch (collusion) and the individual _offending_ validator's own slashing history.
```

> Slashing is applied as part of the state finalisation function:
> 
> - As each block is finalised, AFD will: promote within protocol constraints new _accusations_ to proven _faults_ after expiry of an _innocence_ proof submission window
> - As the last block of an epoch is finalised, AFD will: apply accountability for _faults_ to _offending_ validators, slashing [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) and [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake  according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slashing is applied as part of the state finalisation function. As the last block of an epoch is finalised, the Autonity contract will: apply accountability for _faults_ to _offending_ validators, slashing [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) and [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake  according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.
```

No need to explain how the accusation are promoted, should already be explained before when we explain the accusation flow.

Rewards are paid for reporting a slashable _fault_ at epoch end. The _offending_ validator's share of the epoch's staking rewards is forefeited and paid to the  _reporting_ validator `treasury` account for distribution along with the staking rewards at epoch end.

### Accountability prerequisites 

To participate in AFD a [validator](/glossary/#validator) must be a [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) member.

## Accountability and Fault Detection protocol

AFD roles, core concepts, and the lifecycle of accountability event processing from accusation to slashing.

> ### Validator roles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Roles
```

Since we have also `Autonity community` in the list which is not part of the validators.

As consensus committee members, validators play the following roles in AFD processing:

> - _reporting_: as the validator reporting a suspected rule infraction and submitting new _accusation_ on-chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _reporting_: as the validator reporting a (suspected) rule infraction and submitting new _fault proof_ / _accusation_ on-chain
```

validators can report both fault proofs or accusations

- _offending_: as the validator committing a suspected rule infraction and being requested to submit _innocence_ proofs on-chain.
- _committee member_: as a validator in the consensus committee executing Autonity's consensus protocol and for AFD handling and processing accountability events, maintaining system state for accountability events, and computing and applying slashing penalties.

Validators play the following economic roles in AFD processing:

> - _loss_: loss of stake, validator reputation, staking reward revenue as the _offending_ validator of a slashed _fault_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _offender_: loss of stake, validator reputation, staking reward revenue as the _offending_ validator of a slashed _fault_
```

maybe offender is better as a name for a role?

Author: yes!

---
title: "Accountability and fault detection"
linkTitle: "Accountability and fault detection"
weight: 6
description: >

>   Autonity's Accountability Fault Detection model -- reporting mechanism, temporal constraints and economics for reporting offences and penalties for Byzantine behaviour.

Reviewer 2: Without a comma, this sentence is very difficult to parse:

```suggestion
  Autonity's Accountability Fault Detection model -- reporting mechanism, temporal constraints, and economics for reporting offences and penalties for Byzantine behavior.
```

---

## Overview

This section describes the Autonity accountability and fault detection protocol, the role of validators in submitting and verifying accountability event proofs (fault, accusation, innocence), the lifecycle for fault accountability and detection, and slashing.

Autonity implements an _accountability and fault detection_ (AFD) protocol for detecting infractions of consensus rules by validators participating in [consensus](/glossary/#consensus) as [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) members. [Consensus](/glossary/#consensus) rules govern committee behaviour while participating in block proposal and voting. Failure to adhere to these rules is a _rule infraction_.

> Proven rule infractions are reported as _faults_ and slashing makes faults _accountable_. Faults are _detected_ by validators and submitted on chain as accountability _events_ providing proof of misbehaviour. Proofs are derived from consensus messaging between validators during consensus rounds and submitted on-chain to the Accountability Contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Proven rule infractions are reported as _faults_ and slashing makes faults _accountable_. Faults are _detected_ by validators and submitted on chain as _accountability events_ providing proof of misbehavior. Proofs are derived from consensus messaging between validators during consensus rounds and submitted on-chain to the Accountability Contract.
```

It is important to note that AFD runs alongside Autonity's Tendermint proof of stake consensus implementation and is _fully automated_: accountability events are generated and processed by protocol; no manual intervention by validator operators is required. 

AFD functions by submitting, verifying, and processing accountability event proofs by epoch. Rule infractions can be:

> - directly submitted as a _fault_ proof by a _reporting_ validator

Reviewer 2: In an italicized term, the entire term should be italicized, not just the adjective component:

```suggestion
- directly submitted as a _fault_ proof by a _reporting validator_
```

- promoted from accusations, which in turns are:

>   - reported as an _accusation_, submitted by a _reporting_ validator against an _offending_ validator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - reported as an _accusation_, submitted by a _reporting validator_ against an _offending validator_
```

>   - eventually defended by an _innocence_ proof, submitted by the _offending_ validator within a proof submission window measured in blocks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - eventually defended by an _innocence_ proof, submitted by the _offending validator_ within a proof submission window measured in blocks
```

  - if not defended, promoted to _fault_ by the protocol once the innocence window has expired.

Slashing penalties are computed by protocol and  applied for proven faults at epoch end. The penalty amount is computed based on a base slashing rate and slashing factors including the total number of slashable offences committed in the epoch (collusion) and the individual _offending_ validator's own slashing history.

Slashing is applied as part of the state finalisation function. As the last block of an epoch is finalized, the Autonity contract will: apply accountability for _faults_ to _offending_ validators, slashing [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) and [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake  according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.

> Rewards are paid for reporting a slashable _fault_ at epoch end. The _offending_ validator's share of the epoch's staking rewards is forefeited and paid to the  _reporting_ validator `treasury` account for distribution along with the staking rewards at epoch end.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Slashing penalties are computed by protocol and  applied for proven faults at epoch end. The penalty amount is computed based on a base slashing rate and slashing factors including the total number of slashable offences committed in the epoch (collusion) and the individual _offending validator's_ own slashing history.

Slashing is applied as part of the state finalization function. As the last block of an epoch is finalized, the Autonity contract will: apply accountability for _faults_ to _offending validators_, slashing [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) and [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake  according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.

Rewards are paid for reporting a slashable _fault_ at epoch end. The offending_ validator's_ share of the epoch's staking rewards is forfeited and paid to the  _reporting validator_ `treasury` account for distribution along with the staking rewards at epoch end.
```

### Accountability prerequisites 

To participate in AFD a [validator](/glossary/#validator) must be a [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) member.

## Accountability and Fault Detection protocol

AFD roles, core concepts, and the lifecycle of accountability event processing from accusation to slashing.

### Roles

As consensus committee members, validators play the following roles in AFD processing:

- _reporting_: as the validator reporting a (suspected) rule infraction and submitting new _fault proof_ / _accusation_ on-chain
- _offending_: as the validator committing a suspected rule infraction and being requested to submit _innocence_ proofs on-chain.

> - _committee member_: as a validator in the consensus committee executing Autonity's consensus protocol and for AFD handling and processing accountability events, maintaining system state for accountability events, and computing and applying slashing penalties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- _reporting_: as the validator reporting a (suspected) rule infraction and submitting new _fault proof_ / _accusation_ on-chain
- _offending_: as the validator committing a suspected rule infraction and being requested to submit _innocence_ proofs on-chain
- _committee member_: as a validator in the consensus committee executing Autonity's consensus protocol and for AFD handling and processing accountability events, maintaining system state for accountability events, and computing and applying slashing penalties
```

Validators play the following economic roles in AFD processing:

- _offender_: loss of stake, validator reputation, staking reward revenue as the _offending_ validator of a slashed _fault_

> - _beneficiary_: gain of the _offending_ validator's protocol rewards as the _reporting_ validator of a slashed _fault_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- _offender_: loss of stake, validator reputation, staking reward revenue as the _offending validator_ of a slashed _fault_
- _beneficiary_: gain of the _offending validator's_ protocol rewards as the _reporting validator_ of a slashed _fault_.
```

Autonity community play the following economic role in AFD processing:

- _beneficiary_: gain of slashed stake token for community funds.

### Protocol primitives

Essential primitives of AFD are: accusation, innocence, and fault proofs; slashing and severity; jailing.

#### Accusations

> An _accusation_ is a claim that a consensus committee member has failed to participate correctly in consensus. Protocol only allows a validator to be under _accusation_ once at a time. New _accusations_ are made by submitting evidence of an accusable rule infraction on-chain as an accountability event of type `Accusation`.

Reviewer 2: Missing "the", but the sentence needs a rewrite:

```suggestion
An _accusation_ is a claim that a consensus committee member has failed to participate correctly in consensus. The protocol only allows a validator to have one pending _accusation_ at a time. New _accusations_ are made by submitting evidence of an accusable rule infraction on-chain as an accountability event of type `Accusation`.
```

> The protocol only allows a validator to be under _accusation_ once at a time.

"once at a time"?

Author: Reworded from:

>The protocol only allows a validator to be under _accusation_ once at a time. 

To:

>The protocol only allows a validator to have one pending _accusation_ at a time.

> Accusations do not automatically cause slashing and an _innocence proof window_ measured in blocks gives the accused _offending_ validator a window to detect an _accusation_ and prove _innocence_ by submitting an _innocence_ proof on-chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Accusations do not automatically cause slashing and an _innocence proof window_ measured in blocks gives the accused _offending validator_ a window to detect an _accusation_ and prove _innocence_ by submitting an _innocence_ proof on-chain.
```

> Accusations do not automatically cause slashing and an _innocence proof window_ measured in blocks gives the accused _offending_ validator a window to detect an _accusation_ and prove _innocence_ by submitting an _innocence_ proof on-chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Accusations do not automatically cause slashing, as an _innocence proof window_ measured in blocks gives the accused _offending_ validator a window to detect an _accusation_ and prove _innocence_ by submitting an _innocence_ proof on-chain.
```

Author: Edited in commit 729649df83fefb59e35069f061a1f11f0045328f

> After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of an _accusation_ on-chain a `NewAccusation` event is emitted logging the _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, _severity_ of rule infraction, and the event ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of an _accusation_ on-chain, a `NewAccusation` event is emitted logging the _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, _severity_ of rule infraction, and the event ID.
```

There are protocol constraints on when an _accusation_ can be made. A _reporting_ validator can only submit an _accusation_ _proof_ if:

> - the _offending_ validator:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the _offending validator_:
```

  - is not currently already accused of committing a rule infraction, i.e. there is a _pending accusation_. In this case, a _new accusation_ cannot be made until expiry of the _innocence proof window_. This creates a _deadline_ measured in block height before which a new `accusation` cannot be submitted.
- it is within the _accusation window_:
  - an accusation must be made `<= 256` blocks after the detected accountability event.

As each block is finalized, AFD will attempt to promote _expired accusations_ (where the _innocence proof submission window_ has elapsed) to proven _faults_.
<!--
To check if an _offending_ validator has a _pending accusation_, a _reporting_ validator calls protocol functions:

- [`canAccuse()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canaccuse): to determine if (a) an offending validator is accusable, and, (b) the _deadline_ number of blocks remaining in the _innocence proof submission window_ if there is a _pending accusation_.
- [`canSlash()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canslash): to determine if the  _offending_ validator already has a _fault_ for a rule infraction in the epoch with a _severity_ higher than the new accusable rule infraction detected.

> -->

Reviewer 2: Commented-out content should be deleted or moved to a Github issue to be actioned when appropriated.

Author: Done, issue #108 created and edited out in commit 729649df83fefb59e35069f061a1f11f0045328f here.

#### Innocence

> An _innocence_ is a claim refuting an _accusation_ for an accusable rule infraction. An _innocence_ is made by an _offending_ validator to prove innocence from a _pending accusation_ against it. Claims of _innocence_ are made by submitting _proof_ of innocence on-chain as an event of type `Innocence`. If successful, a proof of innocence cancels the _pending accusation_.

Reviewer 2: Repetition in first two sentences:

```suggestion
An _offending validator_ can present a claim of _innocence_ to refute a _pending accusation_ for an accusable rule infraction. Claims of _innocence_ are made by submitting an _innocence proof_ on-chain as an event of type `InnocenceProof`. If successful, the proof of _innocence_ cancels the _pending accusation_.
```

> The _offending_ validator has a limited time window to submit a _proof_ of _innocence_, otherwise, the _accusation_ may be _promoted_ to a _fault_ and be slashable at the end of epoch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The _offending_ validator has a limited time window to submit a _proof of innocence_, otherwise, the _accusation_ may be _promoted_ to a _fault_ and be slashable at the end of epoch.
```

> An _innocence_ must be submitted within an _innocence proof submission window_ to be accepted, a designated number of blocks set as a protocol parameter. The window begins at the block height number at which the _accusation_ was reported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An _innocence_ claim must be submitted within an _innocence proof submission window_ to be accepted, a designated number of blocks set as a protocol parameter. The window begins at the block height number at which the _accusation_ was reported.
```

> If the _innocence_ is successfully verified, then the _accusation_ queue is checked and the corresponding _accusation_ is cancelled. The _pending accusation_ state is cleared and a _reporting_ validator is now able to submit a _new accusation_ against the _offending_ validator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the _innocence_ claim is successfully verified, then the _accusation_ queue is checked and the corresponding _accusation_ is cancelled. The _pending accusation_ state is cleared and a _reporting validator_ is now able to submit a _new accusation_ against the _offending validator_.
```

<!--
To check if a _new accusation_ has been made against it, an _offending_ validator:

- subscribes to `NewAccusation` events where it is the offender, retrieves the accountability event ID and queries the `Events` data structure to retrieve the _pending accusation_ against it.

> -->

Reviewer 2: Commented-out content should be removed, or else an issue created in the issue tracker to note further action required.

Author: Done. Issue:  #108 , #109

> After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of an _innocence_ on-chain an `InnocenceProven` event is emitted logging: _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, and `0` indicating there are no pending accusations against the validator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of an _innocence_ claim on-chain, an `InnocenceProven` event is emitted that logs: _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, and `0` indicating there are no pending accusations against the validator.
```

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

> As noted under [Accusations](/concepts/accountability/#accusations) above, a validator with a _pending accusation_ is not accusable because protocol has to wait to determine if the _pending accusation_ has been defended or, if not, promoted to a fault. Until then, protocol cannot determine if the _offending_ validator has committed a rule infraction with a higher _severity_ or not in the epoch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As noted under [Accusations](/concepts/accountability/#accusations) above, a validator with a _pending accusation_ is not accusable because protocol has to wait to determine if the _pending accusation_ has been defended or, if not, promoted to a fault. Until then, protocol cannot determine if the _offending validator_ has committed a rule infraction with a higher _severity_ or not in the epoch.
```

{{% /alert %}}

#### Faults 

A _fault_ is a proven consensus rule infraction in an epoch. A _fault_ is created by:

- **direct submission**: a _reporting_ validator submits a _fault proof_ on-chain.  Directly submitted faults:
  - does not offer possibility of defence
  - are unforgeable evidence of rule infraction

- **_promotion_ of an _accusation_**:
  - offers the possibility of defence by submission of an _innocence_ proof

>   - promotion to _fault_ requires the _accusation_ to have a higher _severity_ than any _fault_ the _offending_ validator has for the epoch.

Reviewer 2: The unnecessary nesting can be eliminated:

```suggestion
A _fault_ is a proven consensus rule infraction in an epoch. A _fault_ is created in one of two ways:

- **Directly**: A _fault proof_ is submitted on-chain directly by a _reporting validator_. This method of fault reporting is reserved for rule infractions that rely on unforgeable evidence. It does not offer the possibility of defense.

- **Promotion**: A _pending accusation_ is automatically promoted to a _fault_ after expiry of the _innocence proof submission window_ without a successfully verified _innocence_ claim. This method offers the possibility of defense by submission of an _innocence proof_.
```

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
Unlike _accusations_ where an accusation must be made within a `<= 256` block window of the rule infraction, there is no _window_ constraint for direct _fault_ submissions.

A direct fault proof can be reported at any time.
{{% /alert %}}

Slashing for _faults_ is applied at the end of each epoch. For each validator with _fault(s)_ slashing is applied for the _fault_ with the highest _severity_ (grouping faults by epoch).

> After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of a directly submitted _fault_ on-chain a `NewFaultProof` event is emitted logging the _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, _severity_ of rule infraction, and the event ID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of a directly submitted _fault_ on-chain, a `NewFaultProof` event is emitted logging the _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, _severity_ of rule infraction, and the event ID.
```

#### Slashing and severity

> The AFD protocol will only apply slashing to an _offending_ validator once for epoch, only slashing the reported _fault_ with the highest _severity_ in an epoch. Note that a validator can still be slashed for multiple offenses at the end of an epoch, if the sanctioned faults were committed in past distinct epochs.

Reviewer 2: > The AFD protocol will only apply slashing to an _offending validator_ once for epoch, only slashing the reported _fault_ with the highest _severity_ in an epoch. Note that a validator can still be slashed for multiple offenses at the end of an epoch, if the sanctioned faults were committed in past distinct epochs.

Please review and rewrite these two sentences for clarity:

- "once for epoch"? per epoch or for each epoch?
- it can't be once for each epoch, because the edge case below shows to slashings for epoch `n`
- it can't be once per epoch, because the edge case below show two slashings at the end of the epoch

Am I missing something?

Author: It's hard to explain and I've reworded it a lot in commit 729649df83fefb59e35069f061a1f11f0045328f.

You can get slashed more than one in an epoch if faults committed in _different_ epochs happen to be reported in the _same_ epoch. I think the rewording should resolve this comment.

Reviewer 2: Yes clear indeed!

> The AFD protocol will only apply slashing to an _offending_ validator once for epoch, only slashing the reported _fault_ with the highest _severity_ in an epoch. Note that a validator can still be slashed for multiple offenses at the end of an epoch, if the sanctioned faults were committed in past distinct epochs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The AFD protocol will only apply slashing to an _offending validator_ once for epoch, only slashing the reported _fault_ with the highest _severity_ in an epoch. Note that a validator can still be slashed for multiple offenses at the end of an epoch, if the sanctioned faults were committed in past distinct epochs.
```

Rule infraction _severity_ has two key influences:

- determining if a new _fault_ is created or not, conditional on the _offending_ validator not having an existing _fault_ with a _severity_ `>=` to that of the candidate new _fault_

> - determining the amount of the slashing applied.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- determining if a new _fault_ is created or not, conditional on the _offending validator_ not having an existing _fault_ with a _severity_ `>=` to that of the candidate new _fault_
- determining the amount of the slashing applied
```

Slashing amount is calculated by a number of parameters, including _severity_. 

For the severity taxonomy see [Rule severity](/concepts/accountability/#rule-severity).

> For slashing calculation and parameters see [Slashing](/concepts/accountability/#slashing).

Reviewer 2: This can be condensed:

```suggestion
The slashing amount is calculated from a number of parameters, including _severity_. For slashing calculation and parameters see [Slashing](/concepts/accountability/#slashing). For the severity taxonomy see [Rule severity](/concepts/accountability/#rule-severity).
```

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

> A validator can be slashed for committing a fault in an epoch more than once in an edge case scenario. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In certain cases, a validator can be slashed for committing a fault in an epoch more than once. For example:
```

- **Epoch `n`**: _offending_ validator slashed for fault committed in epoch `n`

> - **Epoch `n+1`**: new _faults_ are reported for the _offending_ validator: (1) one for the current **epoch `n+1`**; (2) one for **epoch `n`** with a higher _severity_ than the _fault_ already slashed in **epoch `n`**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Epoch `n+1`**: new _faults_ are reported for the _offending_ validator: (1) one for the current **epoch `n+1`**; (2) one for **epoch `n`** with a higher _severity_ than the _fault_ already slashed in **epoch `n`**
```

> - The _offending_ validator has two slashings applied applied in **epoch `n+1`**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The _offending validator_ has two slashings applied applied in **epoch `n+1`**:
```

  - for epoch `n+1`
  - for epoch `n`.
{{% /alert %}}

#### Jail

> Jailing is a protocol action that excludes a validator from selection to the consensus committee for a period of time measured as a number of blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Jailing is a protocol action that excludes a validator from selection to the consensus committee for a period of time measured in blocks.
```

> Jailing may be applied as part of a slashing penalty depending on the _severity_ of the _fault_ being _slashed_. Jailing changes a validator's state from `active` to `jailed`. Validators in a `jailed` state are debarred from [consensus committee selection](/concepts/consensus/committee/#committee-member-selection).

Reviewer 2: Is debarred really necessary? Wouldn't barred suffice?

```suggestion
Jailing may be applied as part of a slashing penalty depending on the _severity_ of the _fault_ being _slashed_. Jailing changes a validator's state from `active` to `jailed`. Validators in a `jailed` state are barred from [consensus committee selection](/concepts/consensus/committee/#committee-member-selection).
```

The jail period is computed by `current block number + jail factor * proven fault count * epoch period` where:

- `current block number`: the block number at the time of computation (i.e. the last block of an epoch when slashing is applied)

> - `jail factor`: a set number of epochs, defined as a protocol parameter in the [slashing protocol configuration](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration).

Reviewer 2: In addition to dropping the period:

```suggestion
- `jail factor`: a set number of epochs, defined as a protocol parameter in the [slashing protocol configuration](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration)
```

Can we come up with a better explanation for "jail factor" than "a set number of epochs"?

Author: I've removed the period and reworded to 'a multiplier measured as a number of epochs' in commit 729649df83fefb59e35069f061a1f11f0045328f.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't get at the meaning, context, or relevance. Imagine defining "volume" as "something measured in liters"...

Instead, a useful definition or explanation is: "volume is the amount of space that something occupies, which can be measured in..." So it's the former part that is missing.

Author: Edited following a conversation with @lorenzo-dev1 in commit 5307cad2aadc6e996f046f45cf5e5565f05e6845

Reviewer 2: Yes the _jail factor_ definition is improved

- `proven fault count`: the number of faults that the validator has been slashed for since registration. This applies a reputational factor based on the validator's slashing history

> - [epoch period](/glossary/#epoch-period): The period of time for which a consensus committee is elected, defined as a number of blocks in the Autonity network's [protocol parameterisation](/reference/protocol/) and set in the network's [genesis configuration](/reference/genesis/#public-autonity-network-configuration).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`epoch period`](/glossary/#epoch-period): The period of time for which a consensus committee is elected, defined as a number of blocks in the Autonity network's [protocol parameterisation](/reference/protocol/) and set in the network's [genesis configuration](/reference/genesis/#public-autonity-network-configuration)
```

> This computes the validator's jail release block number, after which a validator may get out of jail by [re-activating](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) to revert to an `active` state and resume [eligibility for consensus committee selection](/concepts/validator/#eligibility-for-selection-to-consensus-committee).

Reviewer 2: I am trying to reconcile:

> The jail period is computed by...

with 

> This computes the validator's jail release block number...

The wording suggests  the "jail period" means the same thing as the "jail release block number" but this is not totally clear. Why use totally different terms to refer to the same thing?

Author: I have removed the dual terminology and reworded this in commit 729649df83fefb59e35069f061a1f11f0045328f.

I think this should address this.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

> Validator's **must** manually [re-activate](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) to get out of jail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Validators **must** manually [re-activate](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) to get out of jail.
```

  - `Accusation`: recorded if the severity is greater than the severity of a fault in the offending validator's slashing history for the epoch, and, the validator does not already have a pending accusation. Else, discarded.
  - `InnocenceProof`: recorded and corresponding `Accusation` it defends against deleted if: the validator has an associated pending accusation being processed, and, the innocence proof and associated accusation proof have matching: rule identifiers, block number, message hash. Else, discarded
- Fault promotion. Each block until epoch end, protocol attempt to promote `Accusations` to new `FaultProofs`: promoted if the proof innocence window has expired, and, the severity is greater than the severity of a fault in the offending validator's slashing history for the epoch. Else, discarded.
- Queued for slashing. Accountability `FaultProof` events are queued until slashing end of epoch when: for each offending validator with one or more proven faults, a slashing penalty is applied for the `FaultProof` with the highest severity for its fault epoch.

> - Validator jailing: validators may be [jailed](/concepts/accountability/#jail) as part of slashing for a fault. The validator’s node transitions from `active` to a `jailed` state and will only resume an `active` state when `re-activated` by the validator operator after the [jail period](/glossary/#jail-period) expires.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Accountability event lifecycle management comprises: accountability event submission on-chain, event handling on-chain, accusations, innocence, fault promotion, and slashing.

 Rule infractions can be:

- directly submitted as a _fault_ proof by a _reporting validator_
- promoted from accusations where they are:
  - reported as an _accusation_, submitted by a _reporting validator_ against an _offending validator_
  - eventually defended by an _innocence proof_, submitted by the _offending validator_ within a proof submission window measured in blocks
  - if not defended, promoted to _fault_ by the protocol once the innocence window has expired

The sequence of lifecycle events for an accountability event is:

- Detected by validator and submitted on-chain. An accountability event is detected by the AFD protocol and submitted on-chain by a validator.
- Event handling. The event is first verified and then further action is taken based on the event type:
  - `FaultProof`: If the severity is greater than the severity of a fault in the offending validator's slashing history for the epoch, the event is recorded. Else, discarded.
  - `Accusation`: If the severity is greater than the severity of a fault in the offending validator's slashing history for the epoch, and the validator does not already have a pending accusation, then the event is recorded. Else, discarded.
  - `InnocenceProof`: If the validator has an associated pending accusation being processed, and the innocence proof and associated accusation proof have matching rule identifiers, block number, and message hash, then the event is recorded and the corresponding `Accusation` is deleted. Else, discarded.
- Fault promotion. Each block until epoch end, protocol attempt to promote `Accusations` to new `FaultProofs`: promoted if the proof innocence window has expired, and, the severity is greater than the severity of a fault in the offending validator's slashing history for the epoch. Else, discarded.
- Queued for slashing. Accountability `FaultProof` events are queued until slashing end of epoch when: for each offending validator with one or more proven faults, a slashing penalty is applied for the `FaultProof` with the highest severity for its fault epoch.
- Validator jailing. Validators may be [jailed](/concepts/accountability/#jail) as part of slashing for a fault. The validator’s node transitions from `active` to a `jailed` state and will only resume an `active` state when `re-activated` by the validator operator after the [jail period](/glossary/#jail-period) expires.
```

## Slashing

> Slashing penalties are computed by protocol and  applied for proven faults at epoch end. The penalty amount is computed based on a base slashing rate and slashing factors including the total number of slashable offences committed in the epoch and the individual _offending_ validator's own slashing history. For parameters see [slashing protocol configuration](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration) beneath.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Slashing penalties are computed by the protocol and applied for proven faults at epoch end. The penalty amount is computed based on a base slashing rate, as well as slashing factors including the total number of slashable offences committed in the epoch and the individual _offending validator's_ own slashing history. For parameters see [slashing protocol configuration](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration) beneath.
```

> Slashing is applied as part of the state finalisation function. As the last block of an epoch is finalized, AFD will apply slashing for proven _faults_ to validator stake, slashing [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) and [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake  according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Slashing is applied as part of the state finalization function. As the last block of an epoch is finalized, AFD will apply slashing for proven _faults_ to validator stake, slashing [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) and [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.
```

### Slashing protocol configuration

> Slashing protocol parameter settings:

Reviewer 2: When each item in the list presents more than two pieces of information, and especially since one of those items represents a numerical value, isn't this tabular information? A table should be used to present tabular information instead of a list.

Author: Yes. I've moved it into a table in commit 5e265cd5b92e79ab59088cbbd2bcb1e00199f294

- _slashing rate precision_ = `10_000`, the division precision used as the denominator when computing the slashing amount of a penalty
- _innocence proof submission window_ = `600`, the number of blocks forming a window within which an accused offending validator has to submit a proof of innocence on-chain refuting an `accusation`.
- _base slashing rate low_ = `1000` (10%), base slashing rate for a fault of _Low_ severity 
- _base slashing rate mid_ = `2000` (20%), base slashing rate for a fault of _Mid_ severity
- _collusion factor_ = `800` (8%), the percentage factor applied to the total number of slashable offences committed during an epoch when computing the slashing amount of a penalty
- _history factor_ = `500` (5%), the percentage factor applied to the proven fault count of an offending validator used as a factor when computing the slashing amount of a penalty

> - _jail factor_ = `2`, the number of epochs used as a factor when computing the jail period of an offending validator.

Reviewer 2: The last three points should be reviewed and re-phrased. The descriptions are not meaningful, as they describe only the context in which the factor appears, instead of explaining or hinting at what is the role, purpose, or impact of the factor.

Author: I've reviewed and rephrased in commit 5e265cd5b92e79ab59088cbbd2bcb1e00199f294

Reviewer 2: I think this can be further improved, I shall cite my analogy earlier showing the problem with defining "volume" in terms of its unit of measurement instead of its meaning.

Author: Reworded following discussion with @lorenzo-dev1 , please see commit 5307cad2aadc6e996f046f45cf5e5565f05e6845

Reviewer 2: The two definitions are much more informative now

### Autonity slashing amount calculation

> The slashing amount to fine for the fault is computed based on slashing factors: base rate from fault severity, validator reputation (the validator’s proven fault count), count of offences committed in the epoch, slashing rate precision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The slashing amount applied to a fault is computed based on the following slashing factors: base rate from fault severity, validator reputation (the validator’s proven fault count), count of offences committed in the epoch, and slashing rate precision.
```

  - `base rate`: assigned the [rule severity](/concepts/accountability/#rule-severity) of the rule broken by the fault event
  - `history`: assigned the count of proven faults committed by the offending validator
  - `epoch offences count`: assigned the count of proven faults created by all validators in the epoch
- `slashing rate` is computed:
  - `base rate + epoch offences count * collusion factor + history * history factor`.
- `slashing amount` of the fine is computed:
  - `(slashing rate * validator bonded stake)/slashing rate precision`
- the slashing is enforced by:
  - the slashed amount of NTN stake token is subtracted from the validator’s bonded stake and transferred to the Autonity Protocol global `treasury` account for community funding
  - the slashing fine is applied to validator bonded stake according to the protocol’s [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/accountability/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model
  - the `jail period` of the validator is computed to determine the validator's jail release block number: `current block number + jail factor * history * epoch period`.

> - the validator state is updated: (a) the self-bonded and total staked amounts, (b) the slashing amount is added to the validator's `totalSlashed` amount.

Reviewer 2: I don't believe the use of a nested list here is warranted.

I advise exercising caution when structuring content in the form of a nested list, where the content does not represent a list of items that is hierarchical.

I suggest the entire section should be reorganized. For example, break up the nested list into different lists that are separated by paragraphs or sentences.

Author: Yes. This has been restructured in commit 5368502284006e65c1a2b245426bc6dc14dc73b0

Reviewer 2: Great

### Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS) 

Slashing penalties for accountability events are applied according to Autonity's [_penalty-absorbing stake_](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model. 

> The _offending_ validator's own [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed in priority to [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake when applying slashing penalties for accountability events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The _offending validator's_ own [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed in priority to any [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake when applying slashing penalties for accountability events.
```

> The _offending_ validator's own [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed in priority to [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake when applying slashing penalties for accountability events.

Reviewer 2: "...in priority to..." does not seem like correct grammar and makes the sentence difficult to read... how about just "before"

Author: Yes, very much so. Done in commit 5368502284006e65c1a2b245426bc6dc14dc73b0.

> To learn more about PAS, see the concept Staking, [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To learn more about PAS, see the section on [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) in [Staking](/concepts/staking).

## Rules

### Accountability rules

Accountability rules are applied to detect faults in the three Tendermint consensus round phases *propose*, *prevote*, *precommit*. Rules are detailed in the table below.

{{% alert title="Info" color="info"%}}
In the table:

- Rule ID: is the unique identifier for the Rule defined in the AFD rule engine. ID prefixes correspond to Tendermint consensus phases:
  - `P`: *propose*
  - `PV`: *prevote*
  - `C`: *precommit*
{{% /alert %}}

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Accountability rules are applied to detect faults in the three Tendermint consensus round phases *propose*, *prevote*, and *precommit*.

The table below lists each of the rule defined in the AFD rule engine, identified by a unique Rule ID.

{{% alert title="Info" color="info"%}}
The ID prefixes `P`, `PV`, and `C` that are used in Rule IDs correspond to Tendermint consensus phases:

- `P`: *propose*
- `PV`: *prevote*
- `C`: *precommit*
{{% /alert %}}

```

| Rule ID | Description |
| --| --|
| `PN` - `PO` | Propose step related consensus rule infraction. | 
| `PVN` - `PVO` - `PVO12` - `PVO3` | Prevote step related consensus rule infraction. |
| `C` - `C1` | Precommit step related consensus rule infraction. |
| `InvalidProposal` | Proposer has proposed a block that fails blockchain validation |
| `InvalidProposer` | Proposer of a block proposal is not the committee's elected Proposer. |
| `Equivocation` | Validator has sent conflicting messages during a consensus round: a committee member sending multiple prevotes/precommits for different values, a  proposer has broadcast conflicting block proposals to different committee members. |
| `InvalidRoundStep` | Consensus round message contains invalid round number or step |
| `WrongValidRound` | Consensus round message contains wrong valid round number |

> | `GarbageMessage` | Consensus round message was signed by sender, but it cannot be decoded |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `PN` - `PO` | Propose step related consensus rule infraction. | 
| `PVN` - `PVO` - `PVO12` - `PVO3` | Prevote step related consensus rule infraction. |
| `C` - `C1` | Precommit step related consensus rule infraction. |
| `InvalidProposal` | Proposer has proposed a block that fails blockchain validation |
| `InvalidProposer` | Proposer of a block proposal is not the committee's elected Proposer. |
| `Equivocation` | Validator has sent conflicting messages during a consensus round: a committee member sending multiple prevotes/precommits for different values, or a proposer has broadcast conflicting block proposals to different committee members. |
| `InvalidRoundStep` | Consensus round message contains invalid round number or step. |
| `WrongValidRound` | Consensus round message contains wrong valid round number. |
| `GarbageMessage` | Consensus round message was signed by sender, but it cannot be decoded. |
```

### Rule severity

Rules are given a severity rating according to the risk that failure to adhere to the rule brings to block chain finality and integrity.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
In this release all offences are treated as `Mid` severity.

Future releases will introduce an offence scale range. 
{{% /alert %}}

<!--
| Severity | Description |
| --| --|
| `Minor` | _Not currently implemented_ |
| `Low` | Invalid message: invalid proposal, invalid voting message |
| `Mid` | Equivocation message: (a) proposer has sent conflicting block proposal messages; (b) committee member has sent conflicting prevote or precommit messages. Inconsistent message: (a) proposer sends new proposal having already pre-committed for an earlier value in an earlier round; (b) proposer sends an old value that the proposer has never locked on. |
| `High` | _Not currently implemented_ |
| `Critical` | _Not currently implemented_ |

> -->

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's good practice to retain commented-out content in the docs. It can be moved to a Github issue to be actioned if necessary.

Author: Done. Removed and raised as issue #109

## Events

### Event handling

> Accountability _events_ are submitted to the system by validator's submitting proofs of behaviour from consensus messaging on-chain. See [`handleEvent()`](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) for a description of event handling logic.

Reviewer 2: First issue:

```suggestion
Accountability _events_ are submitted to the system by validator's submitting proofs of behavior from consensus messaging on-chain. See [`handleEvent()`](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) for a description of event handling logic.
```

Second issue is that this sentence doesn't make sense:

> Accountability events are submitted to the system by validator's submitting proofs of behaviour from consensus messaging on-chain.

Author: This could be clearer!! I have reworded so:

>Accountability _events_ are submitted on-chain by validator's submitting proofs of misbehavior detected during consensus. 

I think that's enough, it doesn't need the detail on what the raw proof  is as that is covered in the referenced `handleEvent()`.

Author: This has been done in commit 6304512a057ced0aa6bfd2b9470fd9aa60fd868b.

Reviewer 2: Latest wording:

> Accountability _events_ are submitted on-chain by validator's submitting proofs of behavior from consensus messaging. See [`handleEvent()`](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) for a description of event handling logic.

I still don't know what this means.

Part of the problem was the use of the possessive: "validator's" doesn't make sense in this context. Did you mean the plural, "validators"?

Another issue is "from consensus messaging" - what does this mean?

Author: Hmm, I'm trying to say that it's gotten from the Tendermint gossip between validators during consensus round phases.  Perhaps this is clearer:

>Proofs are derived from data exchanged between validators as they propose, prevote, and precommit blocks during Tendermint consensus rounds.  The proofs are then submitted on-chain to the Accountability Contract.

Author: No, it should align exactly with the description in https://docs.autonity.org/concepts/consensus/pos/#consensus-round-and-internal-state:

>>In each consensus instance a consensus round of three voting steps is executed as a sequential exchange of cryptographically signed (i.e. ‘sealed’) messages broadcast between committee members:

Author: So this might be better:

>Proofs are derived from cryptographically signed messages broadcast between committee members during Tendermint consensus rounds as validators propose, prevote, and precommit blocks (see the concept description [Consensus round and internal state](/concepts/consensus/pos/#consensus-round-and-internal-state)). The proofs are then submitted on-chain to the Accountability Contract.

Author: Done in commit b248094eb28f21c1d4cfd82be33257d6484b34be!

### Event types

There are three accountability _event_ types in AFD:

| Event type | Description |
| --| --| 

> | `Accusation` | an _accusation_ of a committee member validator failing to adhere to or violating a consensus rule submitted by another validator committee member |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `Accusation` | an _accusation_ of a committee member validator failing to adhere to, or violating, a consensus rule submitted by another validator committee member |
```

> | `InnocenceProof` | a proof of _innocence_ from an _accusation_ submitted by the accused validator committee member, refuting and cancelling the _accusation_ if valid |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `InnocenceProof` | a _proof of innocence_ from an _accusation_ submitted by the accused committee member, which refute and cancel the _accusation_ if the proof is valid |
```

> | `FaultProof` | a misbehaviour _fault_. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `FaultProof` | a misbehaviour _fault_ |
```

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
See distinction between _direct_ and _promoted_ in [Faults](/concepts/accountability/#faults) above.
{{% /alert %}}

### Event structure

`struct` Event:

| Field | Datatype | Description |
| --| --| --|
| `chunks` | `uint8` | counter of the number of chunks in the accountability event (for oversize accountability event) |

> | `chunkId` | `uint8` | chunk index to construct the oversize accountability event |

Reviewer 2: "oversize accountability event":

1. What is an oversize accountability event? It isn't defined or explained anywhere, either on this page or another page.
2. Is it _oversize_ or _oversized_?

Author: It should be oversize, and it is described in `handleEvent()`. That should have been linked to from here.  I've reworded this for (1) and (2) to clarify and link so:

>Counter for the number of chunks in an oversize accountability event. (Large events are chunked into smaller segments with ID's and stored in a map; see  [`handleEvent()`](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract)).

Author: See commit 6304512a057ced0aa6bfd2b9470fd9aa60fd868b,

| `eventType` | `EventType` | the accountability event type, one of: `FaultProof` (proven misbehaviour), `Accusation` (pending accusation), `InnocenceProof` (proven innocence) |
| `rule` | `Rule` | the identifier of the accountability Rule defined in the Accountability Fault Detector (AFD) rule engine. Enumerated values are defined for each AFD Rule ID. |
| `reporter` | `address` | the node address of the validator that reported this accountability event |
| `offender` | `address` | the node address of the validator accused of the accountability event |
| `rawProof` | `bytes` | the `rlp` encoded bytes of the accountability proof object |
| `block` | `uint256` | the number of the block at which the accountability event occurred. Assigned during event handling by internal processing of raw proof data |
| `epoch` | `uint256` | the identifier of the epoch in which the accountability event `block` occurred. Assigned during event handling by internal processing of raw proof data |
| `reportingBlock` | `uint256` | the number of the block at which the accountability event was verified. Assigned during event handling by internal processing of raw proof data|

> | `messageHash` | `uint256` | hash of the main evidence for the accountability event. Assigned during event handling by internal processing of raw proof data |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`struct` Event:

| Field | Datatype | Description |
| --| --| --|
| `chunks` | `uint8` | Counter for the number of chunks in the accountability event (for oversize accountability event). |
| `chunkId` | `uint8` | Chunk index to construct the oversize accountability event. |
| `eventType` | `EventType` | The accountability event type, one of: `FaultProof` (proven misbehaviour), `Accusation` (pending accusation), or `InnocenceProof` (proven innocence). |
| `rule` | `Rule` | The identifier of the accountability Rule defined in the Accountability Fault Detector (AFD) rule engine. Enumerated values are defined for each AFD Rule ID. |
| `reporter` | `address` | The node address of the validator that reported this accountability event. |
| `offender` | `address` | The node address of the validator accused of the accountability event. |
| `rawProof` | `bytes` | The `rlp` encoded bytes of the accountability proof object. |
| `block` | `uint256` | The block number in which the accountability event occurred. Assigned during event handling by internal processing of raw proof data. |
| `epoch` | `uint256` | The epoch identifier in which the accountability event `block` occurred. Assigned during event handling by internal processing of raw proof data. |
| `reportingBlock` | `uint256` | The number of the block at which the accountability event was verified. Assigned during event handling by internal processing of raw proof data. |
| `messageHash` | `uint256` | Hash of the main evidence for the accountability event. Assigned during event handling by internal processing of raw proof data. |
```

## Slashing economics

> Slashing economics have facets: slashing penalties, slashing rewards for reporting validators. <!--, and transaction fee refund for the last accepted new accusation of an epoch.-->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two aspects to the economics of slashing: slashing penalties for _offending validators_ and slashing rewards for _reporting validators_.
```

### Slashing penalties

> Economic loss to validators and their delegators from penalties is multi-dimensional:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The economic loss to validators and their delegators from slashing penalties can arise due to:
```

- stake token: the _offending_ validator stake is slashed for the penalty amount, taken at epoch end from [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) then [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake according to the protocol's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model. The amount of stake token slashed varies according to the severity of the fault committed and the slashing factors applied.
- staking rewards: the _offending_ validator staking rewards earned if a member of the consensus committee in the epoch when the slashing penalty is applied are lost. The forfeited staking rewards are distributed to the _reporting_ validator.

> - future staking rewards: if the slashing penalty applies [jailing](/glossary/#jailing) for the fault, then the _offending_ validator is excluded from consensus committee selection and so the opportunity to earn staking rewards as a committee member while in a `jailed` state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- stake token: The _offending validator_ stake is slashed for the penalty amount, taken at epoch end from [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) then [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake according to the protocol's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model. The amount of stake token slashed varies according to the severity of the fault committed and the slashing factors applied.
- staking rewards: The _offending validator_ staking rewards earned if a member of the consensus committee in the epoch when the slashing penalty is applied are lost. The forfeited staking rewards are distributed to the _reporting validator_.
- future staking rewards: If the slashing penalty applies [jailing](/glossary/#jailing) for the fault, then the _offending validator_ is excluded from consensus committee selection and so the opportunity to earn staking rewards as a committee member while in a `jailed` state.
```

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
After the expiry of the [jailing period](/glossary/#jail-period) the validator can reactivate itself to resume an `active` state and once again become eligible for committee selection.

> Note that the _offending_ validator will remain in a `jailed` state even after jail period expiry _until_ the validator operator [re-activates](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) by calling the [`activateValidator()`](/reference/api/aut/#activatevalidator) function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the _offending validator_ will remain in a `jailed` state even after jail period expiry _until_ the validator operator [re-activates](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) by calling the [`activateValidator()`](/reference/api/aut/#activatevalidator) function.
```

{{% /alert %}}

### Slashing rewards

> Slashing rewards are provided by forfeiture of an _offending_ validator's staking rewards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Slashing rewards are provided by forfeiture of an _offending validator's_ staking rewards.
```

Slashing rewards are distributed for reporting provable faults committed by an _offending_ validator to the _reporting_ validator. Rewards are only distributed to the *last* reporter of a slashing penalty applied to an _offending_ validator in an epoch. Reward revenue is determined by the _offender's_ share of the stake active ([voting power](/glossary/#voting-power)) in the committee at the time the slashing penalty is applied.

Slashing rewards earned by a _reporting_ validator are conditional on:

- the _offending_ validator being a member of the consensus committee in the epoch when the slashing penalty is applied
- the _offending_ validator's share of the [voting power](/glossary/#voting-power) in the committee, as staking rewards are distributed _pro rata_ to voting power
- the slashable offence reported by the _reporting_ validator is the last slashing penalty applied to an _offending_ validator in an epoch. If multiple slashing events are committed by the same _offending_ validator during the same epoch, then rewards are only distributed to the last _reporter_.

> Slashing rewards are distributed to the _reporting_ validator at epoch end.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Slashing rewards are distributed for reporting provable faults committed by an _offending validator_ to the _reporting validator_. Rewards are only distributed to the *last* reporter of a slashing penalty applied to an _offending validator_ in an epoch. Reward revenue is determined by the offender's share of the stake active ([voting power](/glossary/#voting-power)) in the committee at the time the slashing penalty is applied.

Slashing rewards earned by a _reporting validator_ are conditional on:

- The _offending validator_ being a member of the consensus committee in the epoch when the slashing penalty is applied
- The _offending validator's_ share of the [voting power](/glossary/#voting-power) in the committee, as staking rewards are distributed _pro rata_ to voting power
- The slashable offence reported by the _reporting validator_ is the last slashing penalty applied to an _offending validator_ in an epoch. If multiple slashing events are committed by the same _offending validator_ during the same epoch, then rewards are only distributed to the last _reporter_.

Slashing rewards are distributed to the _reporting validator_ at epoch end.
```

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
The protocol distributes rewards for reporting provable faults committed by an _offending_ validator to the _reporting_ validator.

If multiple slashing events are committed by the same offending validator during the same epoch, then rewards are only distributed to the last reporter.

If the distribution of rewards to the _reporting_ validator’s `treasury` account fails, then the slashing rewards are sent to the Autonity Protocol `treasury` account for community funds.

> {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" %}}
The protocol distributes rewards for reporting provable faults committed by an _offending validator_ to the _reporting_ validator.

If multiple slashing events are committed by the same _offending validator_ during the same epoch, then rewards are only distributed to the last reporter.

If the distribution of rewards to the _reporting validator’s_ `treasury` account fails, then the slashing rewards are sent to the Autonity Protocol `treasury` account for community funds.
{{% /alert %}}
```

<!--
### Transaction fee refund

The fees for submitting a new accusation may be refunded to the _reporting_ validator if:

- the accusation is the last new accusation submitted in an epoch.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
Note the validator can determine if a detected fault is accusable by calling the [`canAccuse()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canaccuse) and [`canSlash()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canslash) contract functions.
{{% /alert %}}
-->

> 

Reviewer 2: Commented-out content should be deleted or moved to a Github issue

Author: Done in commit 729649df83fefb59e35069f061a1f11f0045328f and issue #108

---

## Overview

This section describes the Autonity accountability and fault detection protocol, the role of validators in submitting and verifying accountability event proofs (fault, accusation, innocence), the lifecycle for fault accountability and detection, and slashing.

Autonity implements an _accountability and fault detection_ (AFD) protocol for detecting infractions of consensus rules by validators participating in [consensus](/glossary/#consensus) as [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) members. [Consensus](/glossary/#consensus) rules govern committee behaviour during consensus while participating in block proposal and voting as a committee member. Failure to adhere to these rules is a _rule infraction_ and AFD will detect and apply slashing penalties for proven rule infractions.

Proven rule infractions are reported as _faults_ and slashing makes faults _accountable_. Faults are _detected_ by validators and submitted on chain as accountability _events_ providing proof of behaviour. This proof is derived from consensus messaging between validators during consensus rounds and submitted on-chain to the Accountability Contract.

> It is important to note that AFD is embedded into Autonity's Tendermint proof of stake consensus implementation and is _fully automated_: accountability events are generated and processed by protocol; no manual intervention by validator operators is required. 

Reviewer 3: not really embedded, more like running alongside

Author: Corrected in commit b694214f6ff29b8c9e35d601b45c48eac51cd3ed

Author: Did the commit resolve the comment, please, @yazzaoui ?

Reviewer 3: Yes!

> AFD functions by submitting, verifying, and processing accountability event proofs by epoch. Suspected rule infractions are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AFD functions by submitting, verifying, and processing accountability event proofs by epoch. Rule infractions can be:
```

I would strip out suspected because faults are evidence of misbehavior (there is no suspicion, we already know someone misbehaved.

Author: OK, clear.

- directly submitted as a _fault_ proof by a _reporting_ validator
- promoted from accusations where they are:

>   - reported as an _accusation_ proof, submitted by a _reporting_ validator against an _offending_ validator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - reported as an _accusation_, submitted by a _reporting_ validator against an _offending_ validator
```

I wouldn't call accusation proofs. They are accountability events but they are not proofs

Author: OK, clear.

  - defended by an _innocence_ proof, submitted by the _offending_ validator within a proof submission window measured in blocks

>   - promoted to _fault_ by protocol on individual block finalisation if not refuted by _innocence_ and the _offending_ validator does not already have a _fault_ with a higher or equivalent severity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - promoted to _fault_ by protocol on individual block finalisation if not refuted by an _innocence_ proof and the _offending_ validator does not already have a _fault_ with a higher or equivalent severity for the same epoch. 
```

- As each block is finalised, AFD will: promote within protocol constraints new _accusations_ to proven _faults_ after expiry of an _innocence_ proof submission window
- As the last block of an epoch is finalised, AFD will: apply accountability for _faults_ to _offending_ validators, slashing [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) and [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake  according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.

Rewards are paid for reporting a slashable _fault_ at epoch end. The _offending_ validator's share of the epoch's staking rewards is forefeited and paid to the  _reporting_ validator `treasury` account for distribution along with the staking rewards at epoch end.

### Accountability prerequisites 

To participate in AFD a [validator](/glossary/#validator) must be a [consensus committee](/glossary/#consensus-committee) member.

## Accountability and Fault Detection protocol

AFD roles, core concepts, and the lifecycle of accountability event processing from accusation to slashing.

### Validator roles

As consensus committee members, validators play the following roles in AFD processing:

> - _reporting_: as the validator reporting a suspected rule infraction and submitting new _accusation_ proofs on-chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _reporting_: as the validator reporting a suspected rule infraction and submitting new _accusation_ on-chain
```

> - _offending_: as the validator committing a suspected rule infraction and submitting new _innocence_ proofs on-chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _offending_: as the validator committing a suspected rule infraction and being requested to submit _innocence_ proofs on-chain.
```

Author: Agreement clash here - either "to submit an _innocence_ proof" or "to submit _innocence_ proofs"

Author: OK, I corrected that. Applying suggested change!

- _committee member_: as a validator in the consensus committee executing Autonity's consensus protocol and for AFD handling and processing accountability events, maintaining system state for accountability events, and computing and applying slashing penalties.

Validators play the following economic roles in AFD processing:

- _loss_: loss of stake, validator reputation, staking reward revenue as the _offending_ validator of a slashed _fault_
- _beneficiary_: gain of slashing reward as the _reporting_ validator of a slashed _fault_.

> Autonity community play the following economic role in AFD processing:

Reviewer: Do we mean the delegators here?

Author: No. The reporting validator gets the slashing reward itself, it's not distributed by the reporting validator to its stake delegators. Youssef clarified that to me.

I added the mention of community here to clarify that any slashed stake token goes to community funds.

Author: Do you think further editing or clarification is required in the docs here @lorenzo-dev1 ?

Reviewer: I would just clarify that the reporting validators gets the _rewards_ of the slashed validators, but not the slashed amount (which goes to community).

More specifically this sentence under the validator role:
`beneficiary: gain of slashing reward as the reporting validator of a slashed fault.`

can be misinterpreted as the reporter getting the slashed amount.

Reviewer: I would substitute with something like:
`beneficiary: gain of reported validator protocol rewards ..."

Author: Thanks @lorenzo-dev1 - changed in commit 42f0ba91adcb7d0ccbefdc1124bc421e772cfb08

- _beneficiary_: gain of slashed stake token for community funds.

### Protocol primitives

> Essential primitives of AFD are accusations, proof of innocence, fault promotion, slashing and severity, and jailing.

Reviewer 3: Fault proofs too?

Author: That's covered under the entry for **Faults** but this is an error here: 'fault promotion' should be 'faults'. Good catch.

Author: Corrected in commit b694214f6ff29b8c9e35d601b45c48eac51cd3ed

Author: Can this be resolved @yazzaoui or is further editing required?

Reviewer 3: All good !

#### Accusations

> An _accusation_ is a claim that a consensus committee member has failed to participate correctly in consensus. I.e. it has failed to adhere to a rule governing validator participation in consensus and so is guilty of a rule infraction. Protocol only allows a validator to be under _accusation_ once at a time. New _accusations_ are made by submitting _proof_ of an accusable rule infraction on-chain as an event of type `NewAccusation`.

Reviewer: Personally I would not call an accusation a proof, it can be confusing

Reviewer: Also `NewAccusation` is the event that gets emitted when someone submits an accusation, however it is not what you submit.

Author: Thanks. Corrected and edited in commit: f0abfb26c62401bfb3d3de49897a639a5944840c.

Author: Thanks! Corrected in commit f0abfb26c62401bfb3d3de49897a639a5944840c.

Author: Resolving as addressed by edits made

> Accusations do not automatically cause slashing and an _innocence proof window_ measured in blocks gives the accused _offending_ validator a window to detect an _accusation_ and prove _innocence_ by submitting an _innocence_ proof on-chain. The expiry of this window creates a _deadline_ before which a new `Accusation` proof cannot be submitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accusations do not automatically cause slashing and an _innocence proof window_ measured in blocks gives the accused _offending_ validator a window to detect an _accusation_ and prove _innocence_ by submitting an _innocence_ proof on-chain.
```

I would take out the last sentence since this deadline mechanism is explained in greater details in the following paragraph.

There are protocol constraints on when an _accusation_ can be made. A _reporting_ validator can only submit an _accusation_ _proof_ if:

- the _offending_ validator:

>   - does not already have a _fault_ in the epoch in which the _new accusation_ is being made for an offence with a higher _severity_

Reviewer: It's not really the epoch where the accusation is made, but the epoch in which the "suspicious behaviour" happened. e.g.

If you someone accuses you for epoch x but they report the accusation in epoch y, what counts is epoch x

Author: Yes. I've clarified by changing "in the epoch in" --> "in the epoch for". Commit: f0abfb26c62401bfb3d3de49897a639a5944840c.

Author: Can this be resolved after this edit to clarify @lorenzo-dev1 , pls?

>   - is not currently already accused of committing a rule infraction, i.e. there is a _pending accusation_. In this case, a _new accusation_ cannot be made until expiry of the _innocence proof window_ during which an accused _offending_ validator is able to submit an `innocence` proof refuting the _pending accusation_. This creates a _deadline_ measured in block height before which a new `accusation` proof cannot be submitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - is not currently already accused of committing a rule infraction, i.e. there is a _pending accusation_. In this case, a _new accusation_ cannot be made until expiry of the _innocence proof window_. This creates a _deadline_ measured in block height before which a new `accusation` cannot be submitted.
```

The previous paragraph already explains what the innocence proof is

- it is within the _accusation window_:
  - an accusation must be made `<= 256` blocks after the detected accountability event.

As each block is finalised, AFD will attempt to promote _accusations_ where the _innocence proof submission window_ has expired within protocol constraints to proven _faults_.

To check if an _offending_ validator has a _pending accusation_, a _reporting_ validator calls protocol functions:

> - [`canAccuse()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canaccuse): to determine if (a) an offending validator is accusable, and, (b) the _deadline_ number of blocks remaining in the _innocence proof submission window_ if there is a _pending accusation_.

Reviewer: I don't know if I would list the specific functions that are called. AFAIK we do not have a standardized interface for the Accountability contract, so we might end up needing to update the docs every time there is a refactor or we change the internal logic.

I would just clearly list the conditions for a validator to be accusable and slashable, without mentioning which specific functions are called.

Author: Commented out in commit f0abfb26c62401bfb3d3de49897a639a5944840c.

Author: Simplified to remove this low-level detail per the comment. Marking as resolved.

- [`canSlash()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canslash): to determine if the  _offending_ validator already has a _fault_ for a rule infraction in the epoch with a _severity_ higher than the new accusable rule infraction detected.

After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of an _accusation_ on-chain a `NewAccusation` event is emitted logging the _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, _severity_ of rule infraction, and the event ID.

#### Innocence

An _innocence_ is a claim refuting an _accusation_ for an accusable rule infraction. An _innocence_ is made by an _offending_ validator to prove innocence from a _pending accusation_ against it. Claims of _innocence_ are made by submitting _proof_ of innocence of an accusable rule infraction on-chain as an event of type `Innocence`. If successful, a proof of innocence cancels the _pending accusation_.

The _offending_ validator has a limited time window to submit a _proof_ of _innocence_, otherwise, the _accusation_ may be _promoted_ to a _fault_ and be slashable end of epoch.

> An _innocence_ must be submitted within an _innocence proof submission window_ to be accepted, a designated number of blocks set as a protocol parameter. The window begins at the block height number at which the _accusation_ states the rule infraction occurred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _innocence_ must be submitted within an _innocence proof submission window_ to be accepted, a designated number of blocks set as a protocol parameter. The window begins at the block height number at which the _accusation_ was reported.
```

The innocence window start at reportingBlock

Author: Good catch.

If the _innocence_ is successfully verified, then the _accusation_ queue is checked and the corresponding _accusation_ is cancelled. The _pending accusation_ state is cleared and a _reporting_ validator is now able to submit a _new accusation_ against the _offending_ validator.

To check if a _new accusation_ has been made against it, an _offending_ validator:

> - subscribes to `NewAccusation` events where it is the offender, retrieves the accountability event ID and queries the `Events` data structure to retrieve the _pending accusation_ against it.

Reviewer: Here I don't know if I would explain what is the process that the validator uses to get notified of accusations. It is an internal code detail, the reader just needs to now that the validator will automatically pick up accusations and provide innocence proofs. 

Or at least I would not put this level of details under the /concepts category. I think this description would be useful for someone who wants to modify the code.

Author: Yes, hmm. If this "To check..." is removed in the **Innocence** section, then the parallel "To check..." in the **Accusation** section before it should also go for a consistent edit..

Reviewer: Depends which level of detail we want to give with this page. Personally I would keep the concepts page as high-level as possible. Just aiming to give an overview of the high-level mechanism of the AFD

Author: Yes. Agree.

Author: Commented out in commit: f0abfb26c62401bfb3d3de49897a639a5944840c.

Author: Commented out in commit f0abfb26c62401bfb3d3de49897a639a5944840c.

Author: Low-level detail removed. Marking as resolved.

- it is within the _accusation window_:
  - an accusation must be made `<= 256` blocks after the detected accountability event.

As each block is finalized, AFD will attempt to promote _expired accusations_ (where the _innocence proof submission window_ has elapsed) to proven _faults_.
<!--
To check if an _offending_ validator has a _pending accusation_, a _reporting_ validator calls protocol functions:

- [`canAccuse()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canaccuse): to determine if (a) an offending validator is accusable, and, (b) the _deadline_ number of blocks remaining in the _innocence proof submission window_ if there is a _pending accusation_.
- [`canSlash()`](/reference/api/accountability/#canslash): to determine if the  _offending_ validator already has a _fault_ for a rule infraction in the epoch with a _severity_ higher than the new accusable rule infraction detected.
-->

#### Innocence

> An _innocence_ is a claim refuting an _accusation_ for an accusable rule infraction. An _innocence_ is made by an _offending_ validator to prove innocence from a _pending accusation_ against it. Claims of _innocence_ are made by submitting _proof_ of innocence of an accusable rule infraction on-chain as an event of type `Innocence`. If successful, a proof of innocence cancels the _pending accusation_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An _innocence_ is a claim refuting an _accusation_ for an accusable rule infraction. An _innocence_ is made by an _offending_ validator to prove innocence from a _pending accusation_ against it. Claims of _innocence_ are made by submitting _proof_ of innocence on-chain as an event of type `Innocence`. If successful, a proof of innocence cancels the _pending accusation_.
```

> The _offending_ validator has a limited time window to submit a _proof_ of _innocence_, otherwise, the _accusation_ may be _promoted_ to a _fault_ and be slashable end of epoch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _offending_ validator has a limited time window to submit a _proof_ of _innocence_, otherwise, the _accusation_ may be _promoted_ to a _fault_ and be slashable at the end of epoch.
```

An _innocence_ must be submitted within an _innocence proof submission window_ to be accepted, a designated number of blocks set as a protocol parameter. The window begins at the block height number at which the _accusation_ was reported.

If the _innocence_ is successfully verified, then the _accusation_ queue is checked and the corresponding _accusation_ is cancelled. The _pending accusation_ state is cleared and a _reporting_ validator is now able to submit a _new accusation_ against the _offending_ validator.
<!--
To check if a _new accusation_ has been made against it, an _offending_ validator:

- subscribes to `NewAccusation` events where it is the offender, retrieves the accountability event ID and queries the `Events` data structure to retrieve the _pending accusation_ against it.
-->

> After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of an _innocence_ on-chain an `Innocence` proof event is emitted logging: _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, and `0` indicating there are no pending accusations against the validator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of an _innocence_ on-chain an `InnocenceProven` event is emitted logging: _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, and `0` indicating there are no pending accusations against the validator.
```

Author: Thanks, I missed that event name change!

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

> As noted under [Accusations](/concepts/accountability/#accusations) above, a validator with a _pending accusation_ is not accusable because protocol has to wait to determine if the _pending accusation_ has been defended or, if not, promoted to a fault or not. Until then, protocol cannot determine if the _offending_ validator has committed a rule infraction with a higher _severity_ or not in the epoch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As noted under [Accusations](/concepts/accountability/#accusations) above, a validator with a _pending accusation_ is not accusable because protocol has to wait to determine if the _pending accusation_ has been defended or, if not, promoted to a fault. Until then, protocol cannot determine if the _offending_ validator has committed a rule infraction with a higher _severity_ or not in the epoch.
```

{{% /alert %}}

#### Faults 

A _fault_ is a proven consensus rule infraction in an epoch. A _fault_ is created by:

- **direct submission**: a _reporting_ validator submits a _fault proof_ on-chain.  Directly submitted faults:
  - does not offer possibility of defence
  - are unforgeable evidence of rule infraction

- **_promotion_ of an _accusation_**:
  - offers the possibility of defence by submission of an _innocence_ proof
  - promotion to _fault_ requires the _accusation_ to have a higher _severity_ than any _fault_ the _offending_ validator has for the epoch.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
Unlike _accusations_ where an accusation must be made within a `<= 256` block window of the rule infraction, there is no _window_ constraint for direct _fault_ submissions.

A direct fault proof can be reported at any time.
{{% /alert %}}

> Slashing for _faults_ is applied at the end of each epoch. For each validator with _fault(s)_ slashing is applied for the _fault_ with the highest _severity_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slashing for _faults_ is applied at the end of each epoch. For each validator with _fault(s)_ slashing is applied for the _fault_ with the highest _severity_ (grouping faults by epoch).
```

After successful [handling and verification](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#handleevent-accountability-contract) of a directly submitted _fault_ on-chain a `NewFaultProof` event is emitted logging the _offending_ [validator identifier](/concepts/validator/#validator-identifier) address, _severity_ of rule infraction, and the event ID.

#### Slashing and severity

> The AFD protocol will only apply slashing to an _offending_ validator once in an epoch, only slashing the reported _fault_ with the highest _severity_ in an epoch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The AFD protocol will only apply slashing to an _offending_ validator once for epoch, only slashing the reported _fault_ with the highest _severity_ in an epoch. Note that a validator can still be slashed for multiple offenses at the end of an epoch, if the sanctioned faults were committed in past distinct epochs.
```

Rule infraction _severity_ has two key influences:

- determining if a new _fault_ is created or not, conditional on the _offending_ validator not having an existing _fault_ with a _severity_ `>=` to that of the candidate new _fault_
- determining the amount of the slashing applied.

Slashing amount is calculated by a number of parameters, including _severity_. 

For the severity taxonomy see [Rule severity](/concepts/accountability/#rule-severity).

For slashing calculation and parameters see [Slashing](/concepts/accountability/#slashing).

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

> A validator can theoretically be slashed for committing a fault in an epoch more than once in an edge case scenario. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A validator can be slashed for committing a fault in an epoch more than once in an edge case scenario. For example:
```

> - **epoch `n`**: _offending_ validator slashed for highest severity fault committed in epoch `n`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Epoch `n`**: _offending_ validator slashed for fault committed in epoch `n`
```

if highest severity that we cannot have a higher severity fault reported in epoch n+1

  - for epoch `n+1`
  - for epoch `n`.
{{% /alert %}}

#### Jail

Jailing is a protocol action that excludes a validator from selection to the consensus committee for a period of time measured as a number of blocks.

Jailing may be applied as part of a slashing penalty depending on the _severity_ of the _fault_ being _slashed_. Jailing changes a validator's state from `active` to `jailed`. Validators in a `jailed` state are debarred from [consensus committee selection](/concepts/consensus/committee/#committee-member-selection).

The jail period is computed by `current block number + jail factor * proven fault count * epoch period` where:

- `current block number`: the block number at the time of computation (i.e. the last block of an epoch when slashing is applied)
- `jail factor`: a set number of epochs, defined as a protocol parameter in the [slashing protocol configuration](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration).
- `proven fault count`: the number of faults that the validator has been slashed for since registration. This applies a reputational factor based on the validator's slashing history

> - `[epoch period](/glossary/#epoch-period)`: The period of time for which a consensus committee is elected, defined as a number of blocks in the Autonity network's [protocol parameterisation](/reference/protocol/) and set in the network's [genesis configuration](/reference/genesis/#public-autonity-network-configuration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [epoch period](/glossary/#epoch-period): The period of time for which a consensus committee is elected, defined as a number of blocks in the Autonity network's [protocol parameterisation](/reference/protocol/) and set in the network's [genesis configuration](/reference/genesis/#public-autonity-network-configuration).
```

fixing markdown

This computes the validator's jail release block number, after which a validator may get out of jail by [re-activating](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) to revert to an `active` state and resume [eligibility for consensus committee selection](/concepts/validator/#eligibility-for-selection-to-consensus-committee).

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

> Validator's **must** [re-activate](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) to get out of jail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validator's **must** manually [re-activate](/concepts/validator/#validator-re-activation) to get out of jail.
```
just adding enphasis on the manual action requirement

  - `Accusation`: recorded if the severity is greater than the severity of a fault in the offending validator's slashing history for the epoch, and, the validator does not already have a pending accusation. Else, discarded.
  - `InnocenceProof`: recorded and corresponding `Accusation` it defends against deleted if: the validator has an associated pending accusation being processed, and, the innocence proof and associated accusation proof have matching: rule identifiers, block number, message hash. Else, discarded
- Fault promotion. Each block until epoch end, protocol attempt to promote `Accusations` to new `FaultProofs`: promoted if the proof innocence window has expired, and, the severity is greater than the severity of a fault in the offending validator's slashing history for the epoch. Else, discarded.
- Queued for slashing. Accountability `FaultProof` events are queued until slashing end of epoch when: for each offending validator with one or more proven faults, a slashing penalty is applied for the `FaultProof` with the highest severity for its fault epoch.

> - Validator jailing: validators may be [jailed](/concepts/accountability/#jail) as part of slashing for a fault. The validator’s node transitions from `n `active` to a `jailed` state and will only resume an `active` state when `re-activated` by the validator operator after the [jail period](/glossary/#jail-period) expires.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Validator jailing: validators may be [jailed](/concepts/accountability/#jail) as part of slashing for a fault. The validator’s node transitions from `active` to a `jailed` state and will only resume an `active` state when `re-activated` by the validator operator after the [jail period](/glossary/#jail-period) expires.
```

fixing markdown

## Slashing

Slashing penalties are computed by protocol and  applied for proven faults at epoch end. The penalty amount is computed based on a base slashing rate and slashing factors including the total number of slashable offences committed in the epoch and the individual _offending_ validator's own slashing history. For parameters see [slashing protocol configuration](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration) beneath.

Slashing is applied as part of the state finalisation function. As the last block of an epoch is finalized, AFD will apply slashing for proven _faults_ to validator stake, slashing [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) and [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake  according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model.

### Slashing protocol configuration

Slashing protocol parameter settings:

- _slashing rate precision_ = `10_000`, the division precision used as the denominator when computing the slashing amount of a penalty

> - _innocence proof submission window_ = `600`, the number of blocks forming a window within which an accused offending validator has to submit a proof of innocence on-chain refuting an accusation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _innocence proof submission window_ = `600`, the number of blocks forming a window within which an accused offending validator has to submit a proof of innocence on-chain refuting an `accusation`.
```
markdown

- _jail factor_ = `2`, the number of epochs used as a factor when computing the jail period of an offending validator.

### Autonity slashing amount calculation

The slashing amount to fine for the fault is computed based on slashing factors: base rate from fault severity, validator reputation (the validator’s proven fault count), count of offences committed in the epoch, slashing rate precision.

- Inputs:
  - [slashing protocol configuration](/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration) parameters, and,
  - `base rate`: assigned the [rule severity](/concepts/accountability/#rule-severity) of the rule broken by the fault event
  - `history`: assigned the count of proven faults committed by the offending validator
  - `epoch offences count`: assigned the count of proven faults created by all validators in the epoch
- `slashing rate` is computed:
  - `base rate + epoch offences count * collusion factor + history * history factor`.
- `slashing amount` of the fine is computed:
  - `(slashing rate * validator bonded stake)/slashing rate precision`

> - the slashing is computed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the slashing is enforced by:
```

- the validator state is updated: (a) the self-bonded and total staked amounts, (b) the slashing amount is added to the validator's `totalSlashed` amount.

### Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS) 

Slashing penalties for accountability events are applied according to Autonity's [_penalty-absorbing stake_](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model. 

The _offending_ validator's own [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed in priority to [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake when applying slashing penalties for accountability events.

To learn more about PAS, see the concept Staking, [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas).

## Rules

### Accountability rules

Accountability rules are applied to detect faults in the three Tendermint consensus round phases *propose*, *prevote*, *precommit*. Rules are detailed in the table below.

{{% alert title="Info" color="info"%}}
In the table:

- Rule ID: is the unique identifier for the Rule defined in the AFD rule engine. ID prefixes correspond to Tendermint consensus phases:
  - `P`: *propose*
  - `PV`: *prevote*
  - `C`: *precommit*
{{% /alert %}}

| Rule ID | Description |
| --| --|

> | `PN` | Proposer has proposed a new block proposal having already sent a _non-nil_ precommit message earlier <!--, or (b) has received sufficiently many prevotes for an earlier proposal block proposal during the same round. --> |
> | `PO` | Proposer has proposed a block proposal that has already been proposed without attaching as justification the `2f + 1` prevotes from the same round for the value. |
> | `PVN` | Committee member has sent two distinct prevotes during the same round. |
> | `PVO` | Committee member has prevoted for a block proposal in more than one consensus round. |
> | `PVO12` | Committee member has prevoted for a block proposal having already precommitted for that block proposal or a different block proposal in an earlier round.  |
> | `PVO3` | Committee member has prevoted for an invalid old block proposal (i.e. sent an invalid message) |
> | `C`  | Committee member has precommitted for an invalid block proposal  (i.e. sent an invalid message) |
> | `C1` | Committee member has precommitted for a block proposal having already precommitted for that block proposal in an earlier round. |
> | `InvalidProposal` | Proposer has proposed a block proposal that fails blockchain validation |
> | `InvalidProposer` | Proposer of a block proposal is not the committee's elected Proposer. |
> | `Equivocation` | Validator has sent conflicting messages during a consensus round: a committee member has sent conflicting votes  (prevote, precommit), a  proposer has broadcast conflicting block proposals to different committee members. |
> | `InvalidRoundStep` | Consensus round message contains invalid round number or step |
> | `AccountableGarbageMessage` | Consensus round message was signed by sender, but it cannot be decoded |
> | `MsgNotFromCommitteeMember` | Consensus round message sender is not a member of the current consensus committee |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `PN` - `PO` | Propose step related consensus rule infraction. | 
| `PVN` - `PVO` - `PVO12` - `PVO3` | Prevote step related consensus rule infraction. |
| `C` - `C1` | Precommit step related consensus rule infraction. |
| `InvalidProposal` | Proposer has proposed a block that fails blockchain validation |
| `InvalidProposer` | Proposer of a block proposal is not the committee's elected Proposer. |
| `Equivocation` | Validator has sent conflicting messages during a consensus round: a committee member sending multiple prevotes/precommits for different values, a  proposer has broadcast conflicting block proposals to different committee members. |
| `InvalidRoundStep` | Consensus round message contains invalid round number or step |
| `WrongValidRound` | Consensus round message contains wrong valid round number |
| `GarbageMessage` | Consensus round message was signed by sender, but it cannot be decoded |
```

I would keep it simpler

### Rule severity

> Rules are given a severity rating according to the risk that failure to adhere to the rule brings to block chain finality and integrity. For example:
> 
> - failing to finalize a block and/or halting the chain
> - proposing an invalid block
> - voting for multiple and/or conflicting blocks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rules are given a severity rating according to the risk that failure to adhere to the rule brings to block chain finality and integrity.
```

I think the following table already contains examples

> | Severity | Description |

Reviewer: As of now we have only `Mid` severity being used. Should we keep only that one and say that for now all offences are considered `Mid`?

Author: That's a good point. I tried that but when I looked at the table it made me think "Where is Low? And why start with Mid?" That seemed strange and confusing as it raised questions.

Then, in the section on slashing protocol configuration (/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration) do you leave out 

>_base slashing rate low_ = `1000` (10%), base slashing rate for a fault of Low severity

**It's in the code and config.**

So I thought it better to put it in, reflect the code in the release, and where appropriate in the table here pub in not currently implemented.  I didn't mark the Low entry as not currently implemented, because there is a config value for it set in the code...

I mean, if you think it is better to remove it and 'less is more', then OK.

But, for consistency it is more than one edit here.  I think necessary editing is:

- removing the Low here in the table
- removing the _base slashing rate low_ config in the configsection  above - /concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration
- removing the  _base slashing rate low_ in the config in the genesis Reference - /reference/genesis/#configaccountability-object

---
Note on technical writing approach taken here: 

-  keep the docs to **what is in the code and config** of the AGC as consistently and as simply as possible.

Reviewer: >  I didn't mark the Low entry as not currently implemented, because there is a config value for it set in the code...

Then I would keep references to the low severity parameter in the 2 config-related sections you cited (/concepts/accountability/#slashing-protocol-configuration and /reference/genesis/#configaccountability-object) since as you said they are present in the config. However I would comment out this table for now and just write that all offences are considered `Mid` severity for now, since that's what really happens in the code.

That does not introduce inconsistencies, the low parameter is in the config however it is not utilized.

Author: Makes sense. I have commented out the table and will add a placeholder note for now:

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
In this release all offences are treated as `Mid` severity.

Future releases will introduce an offence scale range. 
{{% /alert %}}

Author: Commit 2401d40bc56baeb2145b5857c022b9a41d88eefb

Slashing priority is simply:

- self-bonded stake is slashed as first priority until exhausted
- delegated stake is slashed as second priority when the slashing amount exceeds the amount of self-bonded stake available.

Consequently, validator operator stake ("skin in the game") is at first risk and provides loss absorbing capital in the case of a slashing event. Self-bonding stake is not just a source of income but a public commitment to the operational integrity of a validator node by a validator operator. Potential stake delegators can use the amount of self-bonded stake of a validator as a decision factor when conducting due diligence before staking.

## Rules

### Accountability rules

Accountability rules are applied to detect faults in the three Tendermint consensus round phases *propose*, *prevote*, *precommit*. Rules are detailed in the table below.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}
In the table:

- *value*: is shorthand for "block proposal"
- Rule ID: is the unique identifier for the Rule defined in the AFD rule engine. ID prefixes correspond to Tendermint consensus phases:

>   - `PO`: *propose*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `P`: *propose*
```

P --> Propose
PN --> propose new
PO --> propose old

  - `PV`: *prevote*
  - `C`: *precommit*
{{% /alert %}}

| Rule ID | Description |
| --| --|

> | `PN` | Proposer has proposed a new *value* (i.e. block proposal) having (a) already sent a precommit message earlier, or (b) has received sufficiently many prevotes for an earlier proposal *value* during the same round. |

Reviewer: - Point a) we need to specify that we have a fault only if the precommit is not-nil --> "already sent a **non-nil** precommit ...". Proposing a new value after a nil precommit is allowed.
- point b) is theoretically correct but it is not implemented in the code as it is not _observable_. Meaning we cannot know which messages a certain node has received (unless we are that node). Thus the only check implemented in the code is the one for the precommits. I would be for removing the quorum prevotes part since this is code documentation. I think the prevotes part belongs to a more theoretical specification, but I might be wrong.

Author: OK, so, if I edit (a) and comment out (b) then it becomes:

| Rule ID | Description |
| --| --|
| `PN` | Proposer has proposed a new *value* (i.e. block proposal) having already sent a _non-nil_ precommit message earlier <!-- , or (b) has received sufficiently many prevotes for an earlier proposal *value* during the same round. --> |

Author: Change made in commit 6c88bd69d8b4f5bc652b54d5d00fdb478b7b14a7

> | `PO` | Proposer has proposed a *value* (i.e. block proposal) that has already been proposed without attaching as justification the `2f + 1` prevotes from the same round for the value. |

Reviewer: Theoretically this is correct, but the behaviour in the code is the following. 

When you see a old proposal with validRound = vr you check:
1. Did the proposer precommit on a value different than the one he proposed in vr? If so --> misbehaviour
2. did he precommit for something different then nil in the rounds between vr and current round? if so ---> misbeahviour
3. is there a quorum of prevotes  in vr for a value different than the proposed one ? --> misbehaviour
4. If we do not see any quorum in vr--> accuse proposer, he will have to send the quorum of prevotes to prove its innocence

Now the question that comes to my mind is: what do we want to accomplish with this rule section?

Do we want to give a complete albeit concise description of what is checked in the code, or do we just want to give a feeling to the reader of what this misbehaviour means?

Reviewer: My opinion is that if we want to go really in the details of what is done in the code, we need to make sure that we have a section that explains tendermint very well. It is impossible to explain what we check in the accountability module without going into the nitty-gritty details of tendermint.

Author: Good question:

>Now the question that comes to my mind is: what do we want to accomplish with this rule section?

The thinking here is to anticipate and answer the reader question of "OK, so there is accountability and fault detection for committee members that break the consensus rules. So, (a) what are the rules?, and, (b) what does that rule mean?

>Do we want to give a complete albeit concise description of what is checked in the code

No, that seems too low-level.

>, or do we just want to give a feeling to the reader of what this misbehaviour means?

Yes, absolute. So, I thought a simple listing of Rule ID + Description would answer that.

Reviewer: Ok then I will re-adjust my comments with this in mind.

Author: Terminology simplified in commit [d752ba8](https://github.com/autonity/docs.autonity.org/pull/81/commits/d752ba822288994db03315f7b67b6e9453331bc1): *value* replaced with simple 'block proposal'

Reviewer: The proposer does not have to attach `2f + 1` prevotes to an old proposal.

Personally I would just say something along the lines of:
- PN, PO --> you did not respect the tendermint rules related to proposal
- PVN, PVO, ... --> you did not respect the tendermint rules related to prevote
- C --> ... precommit

In my opinion if we want to explain these rules 1 by 1 we are basically re-writing the D3 paper. I think it would make more sense to give just a high-level overview of the rules, and link to the paper for more details.

Author: @lorenzo-dev1 the rule table has been edited to simplify on the principle of simply having the rule id and a simple '1-liner' high level description'. 

So, the reader can then get a high-level understanding of the penalty being slashed for. For more detail, they can drill into the code.

Reviewer: Ok, I will resolve this thread and open new ones if I have comments on the signle rules explaination.
